docs(plugins): Test a Pipeline Stage Plugin guide (#1906)
spinnaker/spinnaker.github.io: guides/developer/plugin-creators/deck-plugin.md

---
layout: single
title: "Test a Pipeline Stage Plugin"
sidebar:
  nav: guides
---

{% include alpha version="1.20.6" %}

{% include toc %}

> This guide explains how to set up a local Spinnaker environment on your MacBook so you can test the `pf4jStagePlugin`, which has both Orca and Deck components. Spinnaker services running locally communicate with the other Spinnaker services running in a local VM. Although this guide is specific to the `pf4jStagePlugin`, you can adapt its contents to test your own plugin.

Reviewer: Does this guide have to be Macbook specific?

Author: Multipass runs on Mac or Windows (just looked this up), so I'll modify. People using Linux desktops are smart enough to adapt these instructions for their environment ;-)

* [Deck](https://github.com/spinnaker/deck/tree/release-1.20.x), branch `release-1.20.x`
* [pf4jStagePlugin](https://github.com/spinnaker-plugin-examples/pf4jStagePlugin), v1.1.14

## Prerequisites

* You have read the [Plugin Creators Guide Overview](/guides/developer/plugin-creators/overview/)
* Your OSX workstation has at least 16GB of RAM and 30GB of available storage
* You have installed JDK 11; see [AdoptOpenJDK](https://adoptopenjdk.net/installation.html#x64_mac-jdk) for installation instructions or install using [Homebrew](https://github.com/AdoptOpenJDK/homebrew-openjdk)
* You have installed Groovy
* You have installed Multipass
* You have installed IntelliJ and the Kotlin plugin
* You know how to run and debug an application using IntelliJ

## Install Spinnaker in a Multipass VM

 Minnaker is an open source tool that installs the latest release of Spinnaker and Halyard on [Lightweight Kubernetes (K3s)](https://k3s.io/).

1. Launch a Multipass VM with 2 cores, 10GB of memory, 30GB of storage

   ```bash
   multipass launch -c 2 -m 10G -d 30G
   ```

1. Get the name of your VM

   ```bash
   multipass list
   ```

> 1. Access your VM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Access your VM.
```

Reviewer: Same for all these steps; they're all complete sentences.

spin-orca:
  replicas: 0
spin-deck:
  replicas: 0
Generated local /etc/spinnaker/.hal/default/profiles/spinnaker-local.yml:
--------------
services:
  orca:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.1:8083
  deck:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.1:9000
--------------
Place this file at '~/.spinnaker/spinnaker-local.yml' on your workstation
--------------
services:
  clouddriver:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:7002
  redis:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:6379
  front50:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:8080
  orca:
    host: 0.0.0.0
  gate:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:8084
  deck:
    host: 0.0.0.0
  echo:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:8089
  rosco:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:8087
--------------
```

This script creates a `spinnaker-local.yml` on the VM that indicates the IPs where Orca and Deck are running. Furthermore, the script generates Spinnaker configuration content that you need to copy on your OSX workstation. This content tells your locally running services where the rest of the Spinnaker services are running.

**Note**: `external_service_setup.sh` removes the previous configuration each time you run it.

## Configure your OSX workstation for the local services

> Copy the `services` section between the dotted lines in the terminal output from the executing the `external_service_setup.sh` script. Create or edit the `~/.spinnaker/spinnaker-local.yml` file on your workstation and paste the previously copied `services` snippet into it.

Reviewer: How big is that section of output? If it's not too big, I think it's worth including here, for illustration.

## Clone the plugin and required services

> For this guide, `pf4jStagePlugin` v1.1.14, which works with Spinnaker 1.21.0. Clone the Orca and Deck `release-1.21.x` branches that correspond to the Spinnaker 1.21.0 version you installed using Minnaker.  

Reviewer: Incomplete sentence here.

Author: oops

```bash
git clone --single-branch --branch v1.1.14 https://github.com/spinnaker-plugin-examples/pf4jStagePlugin.git
git clone --single-branch --branch release-1.20.x https://github.com/spinnaker/orca.git
git clone --single-branch --branch release-1.20.x https://github.com/spinnaker/deck.git
```

## Run Orca in IntelliJ

1. Open the Orca project in IntelliJ

   * If you don't have a project open, you see a **Welcome to IntellJ IDEA** window.

>       1. Click **Open or Import**

Reviewer: These should all end in periods.

   You can skip the following steps if IntelliJ automatically creates a "Main" Run Configuration. Rename "Main" to "RunOrca".

   1. Click the **Add Configuration** or **Edit Configurations** button to open the **Run/Debug Configurations** window

	  ![Edit Run Configuration](/assets/images/guides/developer/plugin-creators/intellij-edit-runconfig.jpg)

   1. Click the `+` button to create a new configuration
   1. Select **Application**
   1. Enter "RunOrca" in the **Name** field
   1. **Main class**  Click the **...** button.  Wait for the list to load and then select `Main (com.netflix.spinnaker.orca)`. Alternately, click on **Project** and navigate to `orca > orca-web > src > main > groovy > com.netflix.spinnaker > orca > Main`
   1. In the dropdown for **Use classpath of module**, select **orca-web_main**
   1. Click **Apply** and then **OK**

	![Run Orca Configuration](/assets/images/guides/developer/plugin-creators/run-orca-config.png)

1. Run `orca` using the `RunOrca` configuration

   Success output is similar to:

	```bash
	INFO 18111 --- [main] com.netflix.spinnaker.orca.Main: [] Started Main in 11.123 seconds (JVM running for 11.933)
	```

> 	If Orca is unable to find Redis, make sure your Minnaker VM is running and that all the Spinnaker services are ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	If Orca can't find Redis, make sure your Minnaker VM is running and that all the Spinnaker services are ready.
```

   1. In the **Gradle** window, click the **+** sign to link your `pf4jStagePlugin` Gradle project
   1. Navigate to your `pf4jStagePlugin` directory , select the `build.gradle` file, and click **Open**

1. In the **Gradle** window, right click **orca** and click **Reimport Gradle Project**

You can now run or debug Orca and the plugin using IntelliJ.

## Configure Deck for the plugin

1. Update the `deck/plugin-manifest.json` with the plugin information

   ```json
	[
		{
			"id": "Armory.RandomWaitPlugin",
			"url": "./plugins/index.js",
			"version": "1.1.14"
		}
	]
	```

	For development, the values in `id` and `version` can be any value.

1. Create a `deck/plugins` directory and `symlink` `random-wait-deck/build/dist/index.js` to `deck/plugins/index.js`. For example:

   ```bash
   cd <path-to-deck>
   ln -s <path-to-pf4jStagePlugin>/random-wait-deck/build/dist/index.js plugins/index.js
	```

## Run the plugin and Orca in IntelliJ

1. Create a new build configuration

   1. Click **Edit Configurations...**
   1. In the **Run/Debug Configurations** window, click the **+** icon and then select **Application**
   1. Fill in fields 1-6 with the following:

> 	  1. **Name:** "Build and Test Plugin"

Reviewer: Bullets here, rather than numbers.

Author: The hard-coded numbers correspond to the numbers in the picture:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/26799583/87331796-35b5cc00-c500-11ea-99e0-54c3eb9d1531.png)

Reviewer: I think Markdown interprets these as an ordered list, numbering them 1, 2, 3, even if you hardcoded 6, 7, 8. In this case, it comes out the same, but would be a problem if the image were updated.

---
layout: single
title: "Test a Pipeline Stage Plugin"
sidebar:
  nav: guides
---

{% include alpha version="1.20.6" %}

{% include toc %}

This guide explains how to set up a local Spinnaker environment on your Mac or Windows environment so you can test the `pf4jStagePlugin`, which has both Orca and Deck components. Spinnaker services running locally communicate with the other Spinnaker services running in a local VM. Although this guide is specific to the `pf4jStagePlugin`, you can adapt its contents to test your own plugin.

Example Spinnaker setup:

> * OSX or Windows using IP 192.168.64.1 and the VM using 192.168.64.5

Reviewer 2: It looks a little bit like you need these IPs to complete the tutorial. You could template them as `{my-ip}` and `{my-vm-ip}` and use those through the tutorial instead of specific addresses.

**Note**: `external_service_setup.sh` removes the previous configuration each time you run it.

## Configure your workstation for the local services

Copy the `services` section between the dotted lines in the terminal output from the executing the `external_service_setup.sh` script. Create or edit the `~/.spinnaker/spinnaker-local.yml` file on your workstation and paste the previously copied `services` snippet into it.

The `spinnaker-local.yml` has this content:

```yaml
services:
  clouddriver:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:7002
  redis:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:6379
  front50:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:8080
  orca:
    host: 0.0.0.0
  gate:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:8084
  deck:
    host: 0.0.0.0
  echo:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:8089
  rosco:
    baseUrl: http://192.168.64.5:8087
--------------
```

## Clone the plugin and required services

> Clone the Orca and Deck `release-1.20.x` branches that correspond to the Spinnaker 1.21.0 version you installed using Minnaker.  Then clone `pf4jStagePlugin` v1.1.14, which works with Spinnaker 1.20.6.

Reviewer 2: I think "Spinnaker 1.21.0" here must be wrong?

Author: I thought I changed all of those. Originally started with 1.21 but ran into issues running Orca locally.

	```bash
   INFO 90843 --- [main] org.pf4j.AbstractPluginManager: [] Plugin 'Armory.RandomWaitPlugin@unspecified' resolved
   INFO 90843 --- [main] org.pf4j.AbstractPluginManager: [] Start plugin 'Armory.RandomWaitPlugin@unspecified'
   INFO 90843 --- [main] i.a.p.s.wait.random.RandomWaitPlugin: [] RandomWaitPlugin.start()
	```

## Build and run Deck

The Deck project [README](https://github.com/spinnaker/deck) has instructions for building and running Deck locally.

1. Build Deck by executing `yarn` from the `deck` directory.
2. Start Deck with the API_HOST argument, which is the Gate URL.

   ```bash
   cd deck
   yarn
   API_HOST=http://192.168.64.5:8084 yarn start
	```

## Verify the plugin loads in Deck

1. Access the the Spinnaker UI at `http://localhost:9000`.
1. Go to **Applications** > **spin** > **PIPELINES**.
1. Create a new pipeline.
1. Add a new stage.
1. Look for "Random Wait" in the **Type** select list.

### Troubleshooting

You can use the Developer Tools in your browser to troubleshoot Deck plugin issues.

![Debugging Deck in Chromium](/assets/images/guides/developer/plugin-creators/debugDeck01.png)

> Look for `plugin-manifest.json` and `index.js`. It's normal to see 3 `plugin-manifest.json` files. The first one is from Deck - you created this file in the [Configure Deck for the plugin](#configure-deck-for-the-plugin) section above. The next two from Gate are not relevant for local development. If you don't see the `plugin-manifest.json` and `index.js` files, check the **Console** tab for errors. Also verify that the content in your `plugin-manifest.json` file is correct.

Reviewer 2: Would say three HTTP requests to `/plugin-manifest.json` under the network tab in Chrome, not files. One of the requests is an OPTIONS request to Gate, but `plugin-manifest.json` isn't included in the response.

## Debug the backend of the plugin

If you want to debug the backend component of the plugin without a working Deck component, you can create a new stage and configure it using JSON.

1. Start the **Build and Test Plugin** configuration in Debug mode.
1. Start Deck.
1. Access the the Spinnaker UI at `http://localhost:9000`.
1. Go to **Applications** > **spin** > **PIPELINES**.
1. Create a new pipeline.

> 1. Add a new stage.

Reviewer 2: Might say "Add any new stage" and maybe even give an example so that it's clear that it can be a deploy stage or whatever.
